---
layout: post
title: Is there a way out?
description: Essay for the online course, Buddhism and Modern Psychology.
category: articles
tags: 
---
Is life suffering? The Buddha's answer to this question is yes and the word he used was dukkha. Although in modern society, many people claim to be unhappy in their lives, I doubt that they would make the same conclusion as the Buddha did. At the Buddha's age, it might be fair to say that there was more suffering than happiness in one's lifetime as people had a much lower living standard, poverty, starvation, more prone to diseases, which led to short life expectancy, etc. So, is this teaching extreme and becomes irrelevant today? In my view, this teaching is very much relevant today.

To start with, poverty, wars, incurable diseases can still be seen in the modern world. And even if one is lucky to avoid all of these, there is still one thing that the mankind cannot avoid: death. Human beings are pleasure-seeking animals, the more pleasure one seeks, the more difficult it becomes to let go of it when death is confronted. It is not only that one's own death is fearful, but also the death of loved ones, especially when comes unexpectedly, makes life suffering.

One may argue that even death is unavoidable, it is not part of our daily life. In other words, for most of us, we do not think of this topic very often and it is not going to happen in the near future. Maybe, for this reason, some researchers now tend to translate dukkha as unsatisfactory, which draws some support from modern science. Take myself as an example, I used to think one particular thing would make me happy, maybe not forever but at least for a fairly long time. Things included a new toy when I was a child, or a better grade when I was at school, or a well-paid job after I graduated, etc. Of course, unsurprisingly, every time it turned out to be not the case: happiness evaporated quickly and I became unsatisfied. And ironically, today I feel even less happier than when I was, say, a child when most families were considered in living in poverty by today's standard. The scientific answer to this phenomenon is natural selection: unsatisfied species are motivated to seek more pleasures, be it food, social status, or sex partners, to raise the chance to pass their genes to next generations. Imagine one species that is satisfied for a lifetime by having sex just once, their chance of survival, as a species, is not very high and they can become extinct easily. Actually, one study has shown that how short happiness can last by examining the duration of dopamine spike a monkey has after having some sweet juice: less than one second. The study also showed that it is the anticipation of the pleasure actually triggers the dopamine spike, not when the reward is granted. And what is worse, the monkey can get a dopamine deficit if the anticipation is not fulfilled.

What is the Buddha's prescription to this unsatisfactoryness?

First of all, the Buddha helps us to see the unsatisfactoryness more clearly - it is the clinging or craving to impermanent pleasures that ultimately leads us to unsatisfactoryness. Then, according to the Buddha, to escape from this "hedonic treadmill", one needs to follow the Eightfold Path, which provides a guide for ethical behavior, mental discipline, and wisdom. One of the practices of Eightfold Path that is becoming increasingly accepted in the west is meditation.

How can meditation, sitting there and doing nothing, help us? We all have the experience that our mind is wandering when we are not doing anything particular, maybe we are thinking about the past or planning for the future. This is called the default mode network of the brain, according to a paper published by Judson Brewer in National Academy of Sciences, the default mode network is activated when we seem to be "doing nothing". Of course, we are not really doing nothing, mind-wandering, like remembering the past or worrying about the future can be stressful and may cause anxiety. Other studies, such as the one done by Paul Bloom from Yale, has shown that people tend to have affective reactions to everyday objects such as cloud, socks, and they were readily able to place moral judgments on these objects. Feelings, the main tool used by natural selection, once helped human beings to pursue benefits and avoid dangers to maximize their chances to survive and pass genes. However, nowadays, as the environment changes, feelings are no longer reliable to be trusted, and sometimes they do more harm than good. For example, sweet tooth helped people to preserve more energy, today it leads to problems like obesity. Feelings like stress and anxiety may help people to make progress and improve themselves in the long run; however, it can get into the way of achieving any goal at all if the negative feelings become overly intense. It turns out that meditation, by observing the feelings objectively, i.e. to accept the feelings without identifying them or acting upon them, can make the default mode network quieter. In other words, meditation helps us to focus more on the present.

Another prescription the Buddha gave was the idea of no-self. The Buddha’s definition of the self seems to be something that persists over time and has full control over the aggregates that constitute a person, namely the forms, perceptions, feelings, emotions, and consciousness. He claims that such self does not exist. The no-self teaching is known to be very difficult to apprehend intellectually, and according to Ajahn Chah, a well-known Buddist monk, the no-self teaching is meant to be understood experientially, that is, through meditation. Although counterintuitive, modern science does lend some support to the doctrine of no-self. For example, in one study where the patient whose left and right brain is splitted, i.e. not possible for them to communicate, showed that the two parts of the brain gave different orders so the patient acted inconsistently. This means that a unique and unambiguous self does not seem to exist. Moreover, some studies even showed that there are various modules in the brain, and there is not a module that is in charge of all to make the final call, it looks like that the module that is most strongly activated wins. In this sense, it becomes more unclear which module is the self.

In summary, the Buddha's idea about the human predicament is the craving for pleasures that fade eventually, and the prescription is to abandon pleasure-seeking and see the world more clearly through mindful meditation. Today, this teaching is backed up by modern science, and it rings true to me. As a beginner mediator, I started to realize its power in helping me become less stressful and less reactive to the feelings that are arisen from time to time. Of course, there is still a long way to go, but I think that following Buddha's Eightfold Path teaching, at least some of them, would shape me and make me a better person. 


